Initial import of PEP 593:  Flexible function and variable annotations (#1014)
python/peps: pep-0592.rst

The struct documentation [struct-doc]_ suggests using a named tuple to unpack
the values and make this a bit more tractable::

    from collections import namedtuple
    Student = namedtuple('Student', 'name serialnum school gradelevel')
    Student._make(unpack('<10sHHb', record))
    # Student(name=b'raymond   ', serialnum=4658, school=264, gradelevel=8)

However, this recommendation is somewhat problematic; as we add more
fields, it’s going to get increasingly tedious to match the properties
in the named tuple with the arguments in ``unpack``.

Instead, annotations can provide better interoperability with a type
checker or an IDE without adding any special logic outside of the
``struct`` module:

::

    from typing import NamedTuple
    UnsignedShort = Annotated[int, struct.ctype('H')]
    SignedChar = Annotated[int, struct.ctype('b')]

    @struct.packed
    class Student(NamedTuple):
      # MyPy typechecks 'name' field as 'str' 
      name: Annotated[str, struct.ctype("<10s")]
      serialnum: UnsignedShort
      school: SignedChar
      gradelevel: SignedChar

    # 'unpack' only uses the metadata within the type annotations
    Student.unpack(record)

>     # Student(name=b'raymond   ', serialnum=4658, school=264, gradelevel=8)

Reviewer: This example (and to certain extent the second example) is unnecessarily detailed. You focus too much on advocating for specific use case, instead of explaining the big picture with the example.

``Currency`` as a ``TypedDict``, which is still a close approximation
(slightly less strict).

Specification
-------------

Syntax
~~~~~~

``Annotated`` is parameterized with a type and an arbitrary list of
Python values that represent the annotations. Here are the specific
details of the syntax:

-  The first argument to ``Annotated`` must be a valid ``typing`` type
-  Multiple type annotations are supported (Annotated supports variadic
   arguments): ``Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")]``
-  ``Annotated`` must be called with at least two arguments
   (``Annotated[int]`` is not valid)
-  The order of the annotations is preserved and matters for equality
   checks:
   ``Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")] !=``\ Annotated[int,
   ``ctype("char"),``\ ValueRange(3, 10)]```\`
-  Nested ``Annotated`` types are flattened, with metadata ordered
   starting with the innermost annotation:
   ``Annotated[Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10)], ctype("char")] ==``\ Annotated[int,
   ValueRange(3, 10), ctype(“char”)]`\`
-  Duplicated annotations are not removed:
   ``Annotated[int,``\ ValueRange(3, 10)\ ``] !=``\ Annotated[int,

>    ``ValueRange(3, 10)``, ``ValueRange(3, 10)``]```````\`

Reviewer: Something is wrong here and above with lots of `` ` `` symbols and lots of `\` symbols.

-  ``Annotation`` can be used as a higher order aliases
   (``Typevar T = ...; Vec = Annotated[List[Tuple[T, T]], MaxLen(10)]; V = Vec[int]``
   then ``V ==``\ Annotated[List[Tuple[int, int]], MaxLen(10)]``)

> consuming annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consuming annotations
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ultimately, the responsibility of how to interpret the annotations (if
at all) is the responsibility of the tool or library encountering the
``Annotated`` type. A tool or library encountering an ``Annotated`` type
can scan through the annotations to determine if they are of interest
(e.g., using ``isinstance``).

**Unknown annotations:** When a tool or a library does not support
annotations or encounters an unknown annotation it should just ignore it
and treat annotated type as the underlying type. For example, if we were
to add an annotation that is not an instance of ``struct.ctype`` to the
annotation for name (e.g.,
``Annotated[str, 'foo', struct.ctype("<10s")]``), the unpack method
should ignore it.

**Namespacing annotations:** We do not need namespaces for annotations
since the class used by the annotations acts as a namespace.

> **Multiple annotations:** It’s up to the tool consuming the annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Multiple annotations:** It's up to the tool consuming the annotations
```

to decide whether the client is allowed to have several annotations on
one type and how to merge those annotations.

Since the ``Annotated`` type allows you to put several annotations of
the same (or different) type(s) on any node, the tools or libraries
consuming those annotations are in charge of dealing with potential
duplicates. For example, if you are doing value range analysis you might
allow this::

    T1 = Annotated[int, ValueRange(-10, 5)]
    T2 = Annotated[T1, ValueRange(-20, 3)]

Flattening nested annotations, this translates to::

    ``T2 = Annotated[int, ValueRange(-10, 5), ValueRange(-20, 3)]``

An application consuming this type might choose to reduce these
annotations via an intersection of the ranges, in which case ``T2``
would be treated equivalently to ``Annotated[int, ValueRange(-10, 3)]``.

An alternative application might reduce these via a union, in which case
``T2`` would be treated equivalently to
``Annotated[int, ValueRange(-20, 5)]``.

Consumers of specific annotations may decide to not support multiple
annotations and throw an exception (e.g. in the example above the value

> range could throw on ``T2``).

Reviewer: I think all these details (three paragraphs above) are unnecessary here.

> Interaction with ``get_type_hints``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interaction with ``get_type_hints()``
```
I like to include parentheses to emphasize functions. You can also update this elsewhere.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> ``get_type_hints`` will take a new argument ``include_extras`` that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``typing.get_type_hints()`` will take a new argument ``include_extras`` that
```

defaults to ``False`` to preserve backward compatibility. When
``include_extras`` is ``False``, the extra annotations will be stripped
out of the returned value. Otherwise, the annotations will be returned
unchanged::

    @struct.packedclass Student(NamedTuple):

>       name: Annotated[str, struct.ctype("<10s")]

Reviewer: Something is wrong with indentation here.

> ::

Reviewer: Why do you have this?

    get_type_hints(Student) == {'name': str}
    get_type_hints(Student, include_extras=False) == {'name': str}
    get_type_hints(Student, include_extras=True) == {'name': Annotated[str, struct.ctype("<10s")]}

Aliases & Concerns over verbosity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Writing ``typing.Annotated`` everywhere can be quite verbose;
fortunately, the ability to alias annotations means that in practice we

> don’t expect clients to have to write lots of boilerplate code::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't expect clients to have to write lots of boilerplate code::
```

    T = TypeVar('T')
    Const = Annotated[T, my_annotations.CONST]

    Class C:

>       def const_method(self: Const[T]) -> int:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      def const_method(self: Const[List[int]]) -> int:
```

        ...

> 

Reviewer: I would add a short section about rejected ideas (even if there is currently just few of them, since more can appear during the discussion).

PEP: 592

> Title: External annotations in the typing module

Reviewer: Now I am thinking about a possible better title for this PEP. What do you think about "Flexible function and variable annotations"?

Reviewer 2: "Mixing typing and non-typing annotations"? "Extra [meta]data in type hints"? "Non-typing information in type hints?" Just spitballing here.

484 with arbitrary metadata.

Motivation
----------

PEP 484 provides a standard semantic for the annotations introduced in
PEP 3107. PEP 484 is prescriptive but it is the de-facto standard
for most of the consumers of annotations; in many statically checked
code bases, where type annotations are widely used, they have
effectively crowded out any other form of annotation. Some of the use
cases for annotations described in PEP 3107 (database mapping,
foreign languages bridge) are not currently realistic given the
prevalence of type annotations. Furthermore the standardisation of type
annotations rules out advanced features only supported by specific type
checkers.

Rationale
---------

We propose adding an ``Annotated`` type to the typing module to decorate
existing types with context-specific metadata. Specifically, a type
``T`` can be annotated with metadata ``x`` via the typehint
``Annotated[T, x]``. This metadata can be used for either static
analysis or at runtime. If a library (or tool) encounters a typehint
``Annotated[T, x]`` and has no special logic for metadata ``x``, it
should ignore it and simply treat the type as ``T``. Unlike the

> ``no_type_check`` functionality that current exists in the ``typing``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``no_type_check`` functionality that currently exists in the ``typing``
```

module which completely disables typechecking annotations on a function
or a class, the ``Annotated`` type allows for both static typechecking
of ``T`` (e.g., via mypy [mypy]_ or Pyre [pyre]_, which can safely ignore ``x``)
together with runtime access to ``x`` within a specific application. We
believe that the introduction of this type would address a diverse set
of use cases of interest to the broader Python community.

This was originally brought up as issue 600 [issue-600]_ in the typing github
and then discussed in Python ideas [python-ideas]_.

Motivating examples
-------------------

Combining runtime and static uses of annotations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There's an emerging trend of libraries leveraging the typing annotations at
runtime (e.g.: dataclasses); having the ability to extend the typing annotations
with external data would be a great boon for those libraries.

> Example::

Reviewer: Make it clear that this example is about hypothetic functionality in `cstruct` module.

    UnsignedShort = Annotated[int, cstruct.ctype('H')]
    SignedChar = Annotated[int, cstruct.ctype('b')]

    class Student(cstruct.Packed):
        # mypy typechecks 'name' field as 'str'
        name: Annotated[str, cstruct.ctype("<10s")]
        serialnum: UnsignedShort
        school: SignedChar

>         gradelevel: SignedChar

Reviewer: Maybe we can keep only one `SignedChar` field for brevity?

    # 'unpack' only uses the metadata within the type annotations
    Student.unpack(record)
    # Student(name=b'raymond   ', serialnum=4658, school=264, gradelevel=8)

Lowering barriers to developing new typing constructs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Typically when adding a new type, we need to upstream that type to the
typing module and change mypy, PyCharm [pycharm]_, Pyre,
pytype [pytype]_, etc...
This is particularly important when working on open-source code that

> makes use of our new types, seeing as the code would not be immediately

Reviewer: ```suggestion
makes use of our these types, seeing as the code would not be immediately
```

transportable to other developers' tools without additional logic. As a result,
there is a high cost to developing and trying out new types in a codebase.
Ideally, we should be able to introduce new types in a manner that allows for
graceful degradation when clients do not have a custom mypy plugin
[mypy-plugin]_, which would lower the barrier to development and ensure some

> degree of backward compatibility.

Reviewer: TBH, this sentence is still not very clear. In particular, it is not clear what is special about mypy here. Maybe add "for example" somewhere?

For example, suppose that we wanted to add support for tagged unions
[tagged-union]_ to Python. One way to accomplish would be to annotate
``TypedDict`` [typed-dict]_ in Python such that only one field is allowed to be
set::

    Currency = Annotated[
        TypedDict('Currency', {'dollars': float, 'pounds': float}, total=False),
        TaggedUnion,
    ]

This is a somewhat cumbersome syntax but it allows us to iterate on this
proof-of-concept and have people with type checkers (or other tools) that don't

> yet support this feature work in a codebase with tagged unions. We could easily

Reviewer: You often use "we" while it is not always totally clear whom do you mean.

a ``TypedDict``, which is still a close approximation (slightly less strict).

Specification
-------------

Syntax
~~~~~~

``Annotated`` is parameterized with a type and an arbitrary list of
Python values that represent the annotations. Here are the specific
details of the syntax:

* The first argument to ``Annotated`` must be a valid type

* Multiple type annotations are supported (``Annotated`` supports variadic
  arguments)::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")]

* ``Annotated`` must be called with at least two arguments (
  ``Annotated[int]`` is not valid)

* The order of the annotations is preserved and matters for equality
  checks::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")] != Annotated[
        int, ctype("char"), ValueRange(3, 10)
    ]

* Nested ``Annotated`` types are flattened, with metadata ordered
  starting with the innermost annotation::

    Annotated[Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10)], ctype("char")] == Annotated[
        int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")
    ]

* Duplicated annotations are not removed::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10)] != Annotated[
        int, ValueRange(3, 10), ValueRange(3, 10)
    ]

> * ``Annotated`` can be used as a higher order aliases::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``Annotated`` can be used with nested and generic aliases::
```

    Typevar T = ...
    Vec = Annotated[List[Tuple[T, T]], MaxLen(10)]
    V = Vec[int]

    V == Annotated[List[Tuple[int, int]], MaxLen(10)]

Consuming annotations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ultimately, the responsibility of how to interpret the annotations (if
at all) is the responsibility of the tool or library encountering the
``Annotated`` type. A tool or library encountering an ``Annotated`` type
can scan through the annotations to determine if they are of interest
(e.g., using ``isinstance()``).

**Unknown annotations:** When a tool or a library does not support
annotations or encounters an unknown annotation it should just ignore it
and treat annotated type as the underlying type. For example, if we were
to add an annotation that is not an instance of ``new_struct.ctype`` to the
annotation for name (e.g.,

> ``Annotated[str, 'foo', new_struct.ctype("<10s")]``), the unpack method

Reviewer: Use same name for the hypothetic module here and in the first motivating example.

**Namespacing annotations:** We do not need namespaces for annotations
since the class used by the annotations acts as a namespace.

**Multiple annotations:** It's up to the tool consuming the annotations
to decide whether the client is allowed to have several annotations on
one type and how to merge those annotations.

Since the ``Annotated`` type allows you to put several annotations of
the same (or different) type(s) on any node, the tools or libraries
consuming those annotations are in charge of dealing with potential
duplicates. For example, if you are doing value range analysis you might
allow this::

    T1 = Annotated[int, ValueRange(-10, 5)]
    T2 = Annotated[T1, ValueRange(-20, 3)]

Flattening nested annotations, this translates to::

    T2 = Annotated[int, ValueRange(-10, 5), ValueRange(-20, 3)]

Interaction with ``get_type_hints()``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``typing.get_type_hints()`` will take a new argument ``include_extras`` that
defaults to ``False`` to preserve backward compatibility. When
``include_extras`` is ``False``, the extra annotations will be stripped
out of the returned value. Otherwise, the annotations will be returned
unchanged::

>     @struct.packedclass Student(NamedTuple):

Reviewer: Something is still wrong with the formatting here, this is a syntax error.
